# **The Theory of High-Fidelity Cortical Processing: A Mechanistic Framework for Intense Cognitive Experience** - By Gemini

publicly shared here: <https://g.co/gemini/share/04285252250b>

## **Introduction: From Diagnostic Labels to Processing Architectures**

### **The Limits of Categorization**

For over a century, the study of human cognition has relied heavily on a
framework of categorization. In both clinical psychology and psychiatry,
variations in cognitive and behavioral function are often conceptualized
through a medical, deficit-based model, leading to diagnostic labels
such as Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), Dyslexia, or
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).^1^ While these
categories have proven indispensable for clinical diagnosis, therapeutic
access, and providing a shared language for individuals and families,
they possess inherent limitations when used as tools for scientific
inquiry into the fundamental nature of cognition. Terms like
\"disorder\" or \"disability\" presuppose a deviation from a single,
optimal neurotypical standard, focusing investigation primarily on
deficits---behaviors and cognitions that individuals with a given
diagnosis cannot perform as well as their peers.^1^ This approach often
obscures the underlying mechanistic commonalities that may span across
different diagnostic categories, while simultaneously failing to capture
the vast heterogeneity within any single category.^5^

In response to this deficit-focused paradigm, the neurodiversity
movement has emerged, proposing that such variations are not inherently
pathological but represent a normal and valuable spectrum of human brain
functioning.^1^ This perspective, first articulated in the late 1990s,
reframes conditions like autism and dyslexia as natural variations in
neurocognitive function rather than disorders to be cured.^9^ It
advocates for a shift from a medical model to a social model, where
challenges arise not from inherent deficits but from the mismatch
between an individual\'s neurocognitive style and an environment
designed by and for the neurotypical majority.^2^ This shift
necessitates a move away from asking \"What is wrong with this person?\"
to \"What are this person\'s strengths, and how can we create an
environment where they can thrive?\".^4^ To advance this goal
scientifically, a new theoretical language is required---one that moves
beyond behavioral labels to describe the underlying computational and
neurobiological architectures that give rise to these diverse ways of
being.

### **Introducing the HFCP Thesis**

This report proposes such a framework: the **Theory of High-Fidelity
Cortical Processing (HFCP)**. HFCP is presented not as a new diagnostic
category, but as a fundamental mode of cognition characterized by a
measurably higher resolution, intensity, and bandwidth of information
processing. It is conceptualized as a distinct cognitive architecture
with a unique set of operational parameters, rooted in specific
neurobiological traits. This framework seeks to explain a particular
pattern of intense cognitive experience that is often associated with,
but not limited to, neurotype labels like autism, as well as the
personality trait of introversion and the temperament of high sensory
processing sensitivity.

### **Core Argument Overview**

The central argument of this report is that HFCP arises from a specific
neurobiological substrate defined by constitutional **hyper-reactivity**
and **hyper-plasticity** of local neural microcircuits. This biological
foundation gives rise to a cognitive architecture that can be modeled
from an information-theoretic perspective as a communication channel
with an exceptionally **high data-sampling rate (high bandwidth)** but a
**low intrinsic signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)**.

This fundamental trade-off---receiving a vast amount of detailed but
\"noisy\" information---necessitates a cascade of adaptive cognitive
strategies. The HFCP architecture, to function effectively, develops a
strong reliance on **parallel and embodied processing** to extract
meaningful patterns from the high-volume data stream. This computational
challenge also fosters a **reactive, rather than predictive, cognitive
stance**, as the system requires a higher threshold of evidence before
committing to a belief or action. This entire constellation of
mechanisms produces a unique and predictable profile of profound
cognitive strengths (e.g., high-fidelity perception, deep learning,
superior pattern recognition) and significant, often debilitating,
vulnerabilities (e.g., sensory and cognitive overload, cognitive
rigidity, chronic anxiety, and social withdrawal). These strengths and
vulnerabilities are not disparate symptoms but are the direct, logical
consequences of the system\'s core operating parameters.

The following table provides a structured overview of the theory,
mapping its components across neurobiological, cognitive, and
experiential levels of analysis to serve as a conceptual roadmap for the
detailed exposition that follows.

**Table 1: Core Tenets of High-Fidelity Cortical Processing (HFCP)**

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Level of Analysis     Core HFCP         Key Associated         Manifest          Manifest
                        Component         Concepts & Theories    Strengths         Challenges
  --------------------- ----------------- ---------------------- ----------------- ------------------
  **Neurobiological**   Hyper-Reactive &  Intense World Theory   High-fidelity     Sensory overload,
                        Hyper-Aroused     ^11^, Sensory          sensory           emotional
                        Microcircuits     Processing Sensitivity registration,     intensity, chronic
                                          (SPS) ^13^,            heightened        stress, anxiety,
                                          Neurobiology of        awareness, deep   tendency to
                                          Introversion ^15^      emotional         withdraw
                                                                 processing        

                        Hyper-Plastic     Neuroplasticity ^17^,  Rapid and deep    Cognitive
                        Neural Substrate  LTP/LTD Mechanisms     learning, robust  rigidity,
                                          ^18^, Aversion         memory formation, insistence on
                                          Learning ^19^          development of    sameness, rapid
                                                                 profound          formation of
                                                                 expertise         aversive memories,
                                                                                   difficulty
                                                                                   un-learning

                        High Metabolic    Cognitive Load Theory  Capacity for      High vulnerability
                        Demand            ^7^, Inefficient       sustained, deep   to cognitive load,
                                          Processing Models      focus (in         rapid cognitive
                                          (e.g., Dyslexia) ^5^   high-SNR states)  fatigue,
                                                                                   \"burnout\" ^17^

  **Cognitive**         High-Bandwidth,   Information Theory,    Exceptional       Difficulty
                        Low-SNR           Signal-to-Noise Ratio  detail            filtering noise,
                        Processing        (SNR) in Neuroscience  perception,       distractibility,
                        Channel           ^21^                   pattern           vulnerability to
                                                                 recognition,      extraneous
                                                                 \"bottom-up\"     cognitive load ^7^
                                                                 data processing   

                        Primacy of        Visual vs. Verbal      Strong            Difficulty with
                        Parallel &        Cognitive Styles ^23^, visual-spatial    purely
                        Embodied          Embodied Cognition     reasoning,        abstract/serial
                        Processing        ^25^                   holistic          tasks, need for
                                                                 thinking,         multi-sensory
                                                                 enhanced learning input to achieve
                                                                 via physical      clarity
                                                                 action            

                        Reactive (vs.     Predictive Impairment  High standard for Processing delays,
                        Predictive)       in Autism (PIA)        evidence, logical difficulty with
                        Stance            Hypothesis ^27^        consistency,      fast-paced dynamic
                                                                 resistance to     tasks (e.g.,
                                                                 premature         social
                                                                 conclusions       interaction),
                                                                                   analysis paralysis

  **Experiential**      An Intense &      Aversion Learning      Rich inner life,  World experienced
                        Potentially       ^29^, Strengths-Based  deep appreciation as chaotic,
                        Aversive World    Models ^1^             for aesthetics    overwhelming, and
                                                                 and complexity,   threatening; high
                                                                 strong sense of   anxiety levels
                                                                 justice/honesty   

                        Creation of       Flow States, Special   Ability to        Restricted
                        \"High-SNR        Interests/Obsessions   achieve deep      interests, social
                        Sanctuaries\"     ^30^                   \"flow states,\"  withdrawal,
                                                                 development of    isolation,
                                                                 savant-like       difficulty with
                                                                 skills and        novelty and
                                                                 encyclopedic      transitions
                                                                 knowledge         
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Part I: The Neurobiological Substrate of HFCP**

The foundation of the Theory of High-Fidelity Cortical Processing rests
on the premise that this cognitive mode is not primarily a difference in
\"software\" or learned strategies, but a direct consequence of the
underlying \"hardware\" of the brain. This section will detail the three
core pillars of the proposed neurobiological substrate: a
hyper-functional disposition toward intensity and arousal, a
double-edged capacity for hyper-plasticity, and the resulting high
metabolic cost of processing.

### **Section 1: The Hyper-Functional Brain: Intensity, Arousal, and Sensitivity**

A central tenet of HFCP is that it originates from a nervous system
constitutionally biased toward a more intense registration of the world.
This is not a pathology but a fundamental parameter setting of the
brain\'s processing units. Evidence for this hyper-functional substrate
can be synthesized from three convergent lines of research: the
\"Intense World Theory\" of autism, studies on the trait of Sensory
Processing Sensitivity (SPS), and the neurobiology of introversion.

The most direct evidence for a high-intensity processing style comes
from the **Intense World Theory**, proposed by neuroscientists Kamila
and Henry Markram.^11^ Grounded in experiments on the valproic acid
(VPA) rat model of autism, the theory posits that the core
neuropathology is a state of hyper-functionality in local neural
microcircuits, particularly within the neocortex and the amygdala.^12^
This is characterized by

**hyper-reactivity** and **hyper-plasticity**. In VPA-exposed rats, the
amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex were found to be hyper-reactive
and hyperconnected, with an imbalance favoring excitatory over
inhibitory signals.^12^ The Markrams extrapolate from this animal model
to propose that the human autistic brain processes stimuli with greater
intensity, leading to a cascade of cognitive consequences:
hyper-perception, hyper-attention, hyper-memory, and
hyper-emotionality.^12^ The subjective result is an overwhelming and
\"painfully intense world,\" from which withdrawal and repetitive
behaviors emerge as coping mechanisms.^11^

This concept of a hyper-reactive brain is not confined to the autism
spectrum. The trait of **Sensory Processing Sensitivity (SPS)**,
identified in approximately 20% of the human population (and over 100
other species), describes individuals with a greater sensitivity and
responsiveness to both environmental and social stimuli.^13^ Far from
being a disorder, SPS is considered a fundamental, evolutionarily
conserved trait associated with deeper processing of information.^14^
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies provide a neural
basis for this trait, showing that individuals with higher SPS scores
exhibit increased activation in brain regions critical for higher-order
processing when exposed to social and emotional stimuli. These areas
include the cingulate cortex and insula (implicated in awareness and
empathy), the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and middle temporal gyrus
(MTG) (involved in the mirror neuron system and semantic
meaning-making), and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)
(associated with complex decision-making).^14^ This pattern of
activation suggests that the highly sensitive brain is geared for
deeper, more elaborate processing of incoming information, aligning with
the hyper-functional model proposed by the Intense World Theory.

A third, converging line of evidence comes from the neurobiology of
**introversion**. Eysenck\'s arousal theory posits that introverts have
a higher baseline level of cortical arousal than extraverts.^33^ This
means they are naturally more \"hyperalert\" and internally stimulated,
leading them to avoid highly stimulating environments to prevent being
overwhelmed---a behavioral pattern strikingly similar to the withdrawal
described in the Intense World Theory.^15^ This psychological theory has
found support in structural brain imaging. Voxel-based morphometry (VBM)
studies have found that introversion is associated with larger grey
matter volume in the prefrontal cortex, a region crucial for high-order,
abstract thought and decision-making.^15^ More specifically, negative
correlations between extraversion and brain volume (i.e., larger volumes
in introverts) have been consistently found in regions of the right
hemisphere known to be involved in behavioral inhibition, introspection,
and the evaluation of social stimuli, such as the right prefrontal
cortex and the temporo-parietal junction.^16^ Furthermore, introverts
tend to have a larger total white matter volume, potentially reflecting
greater connectivity in ascending modulatory pathways that regulate
cortical arousal.^16^ While findings across all studies are not
perfectly consistent, a meta-analysis confirmed stable negative
correlations between extraversion and grey matter volume in key
social-emotional processing regions, including the right parahippocampal
gyrus/amygdala.^35^

These three areas of research---the Intense World of autism, the
neurobiology of SPS, and the structural correlates of introversion---are
not describing separate phenomena. They are describing the same
fundamental neurobiological principle from different vantage points. The
hyper-reactive amygdala of the Intense World Theory, the highly
activated insula and prefrontal cortex in SPS, and the larger brain
volumes for introspection in introverts all point to a brain
architecture constitutionally primed for high-intensity, high-arousal
processing.

Therefore, the first hypothesis of this theory is proposed:

> **Hypothesis 1:** *High-Fidelity Cortical Processing is rooted in a
> neurobiological disposition toward hyper-arousal and hyper-reactivity
> of cortical and limbic microcircuits. This is a dimensional trait, not
> a categorical pathology. Structurally, it is associated with greater
> grey and white matter volume in circuits dedicated to sensory
> integration, introspection, and emotional processing. Functionally, it
> results in a more intense, detailed, and high-resolution initial
> registration of both external sensory stimuli and internal states.*

### **Section 2: The Double-Edged Sword of Hyper-Plasticity: Deep Learning and Cognitive Entrenchment**

The second pillar of the HFCP neurobiological substrate is
**hyper-plasticity**. Neuroplasticity is the brain\'s fundamental
capacity to change and rewire itself in response to experience, forming
the basis of all learning and memory.^17^ While this capacity is
universal, evidence suggests that the HFCP architecture is characterized
by a heightened or exaggerated form of this plasticity. This
hyper-plasticity is a double-edged sword: it is the mechanism that
enables extraordinarily deep and rapid learning, but it is also the
mechanism that creates profound cognitive and behavioral rigidity.

Evidence for hyper-plasticity comes primarily from studies of autism,
which HFCP posits as an archetypal manifestation of this processing
style. Research using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has
revealed evidence of excessive long-term potentiation (LTP)---a key
synaptic mechanism for learning---in the motor cortex of autistic adults
compared to controls.^18^ This suggests a brain that is more readily and
strongly strengthening its neural connections in response to
stimulation. Animal models corroborate these findings. In the IB2 KO
mouse model of autism, cerebellar granule cells exhibit profound

**hyper-excitability** and **hyper-plasticity**, with LTP being over
five times larger than in wild-type mice.^39^ This effect is linked to
the hyperfunction of NMDA receptors, which are critical for synaptic
plasticity, and results in an increased excitatory/inhibitory (E/I)
balance.^39^ Further research suggests this hyper-plastic state may
persist across the lifespan, with individuals with ASD showing
consistently increased modulation of cortical excitability compared to
typically developing individuals, potentially conferring a protective
effect against age-related cognitive decline.^40^

This evidence for a highly malleable, fast-learning brain presents a
paradox. The same populations are defined by their profound **behavioral
rigidity**, insistence on sameness, and restricted, repetitive behaviors
(RRBs).^41^ These are not merely simple motor stereotypes; they
encompass \"higher-order\" cognitive inflexibility, such as an
inflexible adherence to routines and circumscribed interests.^41^ This
raises a critical question: how can a hyper-plastic brain be the
substrate for a behaviorally rigid phenotype?

The resolution to this paradox lies in understanding that rigidity is
not the *opposite* of learning, but a *consequence* of it. The mechanism
is the same; only the context and valence of the experience differ. The
PIA (Predictive Impairment in Autism) hypothesis, proposed by Sinha and
colleagues, posits that an impaired ability to predict the environment
leads to a world experienced as chaotic, overwhelming, and
anxiety-provoking.^27^ The Intense World Theory, as discussed, posits a
hyper-reactive and hyper-plastic brain.^12^ HFCP bridges these two
theories by proposing that hyper-plasticity acts as a powerful amplifier
for the consequences of living in a subjectively unpredictable world. An
ordinary brain experiencing a surprising or aversive event learns to be
cautious. A hyper-plastic brain learns this aversion far more rapidly,
deeply, and permanently. The neural pathways encoding the aversion and
the associated avoidance strategies become deeply entrenched, requiring
significantly more counter-evidence to be re-wired.

This leads to the second hypothesis of the theory:

> **Hypothesis 2:** *The hyper-plasticity of the HFCP substrate is the
> core mechanism underlying both its capacity for profound learning and
> its tendency toward profound rigidity. This heightened plasticity
> facilitates exceptionally rapid, robust, and detailed encoding of
> experience. When an experience is positive or neutral within a
> predictable context, this leads to the rapid development of expertise
> (\"islands of proficiency\"). When an experience is overwhelming,
> aversive, or unpredictable, the same mechanism creates deeply
> entrenched avoidance pathways. Cognitive rigidity, therefore, is not a
> failure to learn, but the behavioral manifestation of powerful,
> over-learned avoidance responses.*

### **Section 3: The Energetics of High-Fidelity Processing: Cognitive Load and Metabolic Demand**

The third pillar of the HFCP neurobiological substrate concerns its
energetic cost. High-fidelity processing, with its hyper-reactive and
hyper-plastic nature, is a metabolically expensive mode of cognition.
This high demand makes the system acutely vulnerable to cognitive
overload and helps explain the experience of cognitive fatigue and
burnout often reported by individuals exhibiting HFCP traits.^17^

This energetic cost can be understood through the lens of **Cognitive
Load Theory (CLT)**. Developed in educational psychology, CLT is based
on the principle that working memory---the system that actively holds
and manipulates information---is of limited capacity.^43^ Total
cognitive load is composed of three parts:

*intrinsic load* (the inherent complexity of the information itself),
*extraneous load* (the mental effort imposed by poor instructional
design or distractions), and *germane load* (the effort dedicated to
learning and schema formation).^9^ Research explicitly linking CLT to
neurodiversity has found that students with ADHD, ASD, and dyslexia
report significantly higher

*extraneous cognitive load* (ECL) during online learning compared to
their neurotypical peers.^7^ This suggests their working memory systems
are placed under greater strain by the way information is presented, a
finding consistent with documented working memory impairments in these
conditions.^9^

The neurobiology of dyslexia provides a powerful case study for the
metabolic consequences of inefficient processing. Neuroimaging studies
consistently show that while skilled readers utilize a well-defined,
efficient network of regions in the left hemisphere, individuals with
dyslexia exhibit under-activation in these key areas (such as the left
occipito-temporal cortex, or \"visual word form area\").^5^ To
compensate, they show diffuse over-activation in other regions,
including homologous areas in the right hemisphere.^5^ This pattern
suggests a more effortful, laborious, and metabolically inefficient
neural strategy for reading.^47^

Direct evidence for this increased metabolic cost exists. While
quantitative positron emission tomography (PET) studies of cerebral
glucose metabolism in dyslexia have yielded a complex picture ^46^, a
landmark study using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
provided a more direct measure of metabolic strain. This study found
that dyslexic boys, when performing a phonological task, showed a
significantly greater area of

**brain lactate elevation** in the left anterior quadrant compared to
age-and-IQ-matched controls (2.33 vs 0.57 activated voxels).^20^ Lactate
is a direct by-product of glucose metabolism during periods of intense
neuronal activation, particularly when energy demand temporarily
outstrips oxygen supply.^51^ This finding provides a direct metabolic
signature of the increased neural effort required for individuals with
this processing style to perform a demanding cognitive task.

HFCP synthesizes these findings by proposing that this metabolic
inefficiency is not limited to dyslexia or phonological processing but
is a general feature of the high-fidelity cognitive mode. The
high-bandwidth data stream (discussed in Part II) inherently increases
the *intrinsic cognitive load* of any given task---there is simply more
raw information to process. Concurrently, the constant mental effort
required to filter this high-volume stream and extract a clear signal
makes the system exceptionally vulnerable to *extraneous cognitive
load*.

This leads to the third hypothesis:

> **Hypothesis 3:** *High-Fidelity Cortical Processing is a
> metabolically expensive mode of cognition. The high volume of incoming
> data increases the intrinsic cognitive load of any task, while the
> effort required to filter this data makes the system highly
> susceptible to extraneous cognitive load. This chronic state of high
> cognitive demand manifests as increased metabolic activity (e.g.,
> elevated lactate) during effortful tasks and leads to faster cognitive
> fatigue and burnout when the system\'s capacity is exceeded. The
> neural \"inefficiency\" observed in conditions like dyslexia is a
> domain-specific manifestation of this general principle.*

## **Part II: The Cognitive Architecture of HFCP**

Having established the neurobiological substrate of HFCP---a
hyper-reactive, hyper-plastic, and metabolically demanding system---we
now turn to its functional consequences. This section proposes a
cognitive model that explains *how* the HFCP brain processes
information. It introduces an information-theoretic framework to account
for the unique perceptual experience, details the adaptive processing
strategies that emerge in response, and explains the resulting challenge
with predictive processing that defines the system\'s interaction with
the world.

### **Section 4: An Information-Theoretic Model: High Bandwidth, Low Signal-to-Noise**

At the heart of the HFCP theory is a model borrowed from information and
communication theory. The brain, at its core, is a signal processing
device. Its function is to detect meaningful signals from the
environment (and from within the body) against a backdrop of noise. The
fidelity of this process can be quantified by the **Signal-to-Noise
Ratio (SNR)**, a measure of the power of the signal relative to the
power of the background noise.^21^ A high SNR means a clear, easily
detectable signal; a low SNR means the signal is faint and difficult to
distinguish from random fluctuations.

Neuroscience research has established that neural systems are inherently
noisy. Analyses of single-neuron activity reveal that individual neurons
are surprisingly unreliable information transmitters, with very low
SNRs.^22^ In these models, the \"signal\" is the portion of a neuron\'s
firing that is driven by a specific external stimulus, while the
\"noise\" is the trial-to-trial variability and background activity.^21^
In fact, for many neurons, their own spiking history is a better
predictor of future firing than the external stimulus they are
supposedly encoding, highlighting the dominance of intrinsic dynamics
(noise) over stimulus-driven response (signal).^22^

The HFCP architecture, built upon the hyper-reactive substrate described
in Part I, can be conceptualized as having a sensory input channel with
an extraordinarily **high bandwidth**. This means it samples the world
at a much higher resolution, capturing more data points per unit of
time. This is the mechanism behind the \"hyper-perception\" of the
Intense World Theory ^12^ and the heightened awareness of SPS.^14^
However, this flood of high-resolution data comes at a cost. The sheer
volume of information, combined with the brain\'s intrinsic
stochasticity, results in a very low intrinsic

**signal-to-noise ratio**. The cognitive system is inundated with
detail, much of which is irrelevant \"noise,\" making the task of
extracting the meaningful \"signal\" computationally immense.

This model provides a powerful framework for reconciling the seemingly
contradictory observations of \"enhanced\" perception and \"impaired\"
function. The \"enhancement\" refers to the high bandwidth---the raw
data contains more detail, more subtle gradations, more fine-grained
information than that available to a lower-bandwidth system. The
\"impairment\" refers to the low SNR---the cognitive system is
overwhelmed by this data, and the task of separating meaningful patterns
from the noise is difficult, effortful, and prone to error. The
\"savant\" ability in art or music is the result of successfully
harnessing this high-bandwidth channel in a domain where the individual
has developed highly effective cognitive filters, creating a local
pocket of high effective SNR. The \"disability\" is the result of the
system being flooded by the low-SNR data stream in domains where such
filters are absent or ineffective, such as a chaotic social gathering or
a poorly designed classroom environment.

This leads to the central information-theoretic hypothesis of the
theory:

> **Hypothesis 4:** *The cognitive architecture of HFCP is best modeled
> as a communication channel with high bandwidth but low intrinsic SNR.
> The subjective experience of \"hyper-perception\" is the conscious
> correlate of this high-volume, high-resolution data stream. The
> experience of \"sensory sensitivity\" and overload is the cognitive
> and emotional consequence of the immense computational effort required
> to extract a clear signal from this noisy, high-fidelity
> representation of the world.*

### **Section 5: The Primacy of Parallel and Embodied Processing**

How does a cognitive system cope with a high-bandwidth, low-SNR input
stream? Relying on a purely abstract, serial processing
strategy---examining one data point at a time---would be exceptionally
slow and fragile, as any single noisy data point could derail the entire
analysis. The HFCP architecture must therefore develop adaptive
strategies to increase the effective SNR and make cognition more robust.
The theory proposes that HFCP achieves this by developing a strong
reliance on **parallel, embodied, and multi-sensory processing**. These
are not simply \"preferred learning styles,\" but necessary
computational strategies for achieving reliable cognition in a noisy
internal environment.

Cognitive psychology distinguishes between **serial processing**, where
information is handled one item at a time in a sequence, and **parallel
processing**, where multiple operations occur simultaneously.^54^
Verbal-linguistic thought is often characterized as a serial process,
unfolding word by word, sentence by sentence.^23^ In contrast, visual
thinking is more akin to parallel processing; the brain\'s visual system
is massively parallel, processing features like color, motion, shape,
and depth simultaneously across the entire visual field.^24^
Neurobiological studies confirm that the brain can flexibly switch
between these modes, often beginning with a broad parallel scan of a
scene before narrowing to a focused, serial analysis of a target.^54^
For an HFCP system, parallel processing offers a more robust way to find
a signal in noise. Instead of analyzing a sequence of noisy data points,
it can detect patterns, gestalts, and correlations across the entire
data field at once.

A second, complementary strategy is **embodied processing**. The theory
of Embodied Cognition posits that thinking is not an abstract,
disembodied process but is deeply rooted in the body\'s sensorimotor
systems and its interactions with the world.^25^ Kinesthetic learning,
or learning-by-doing, is a direct expression of this principle.^61^ When
an individual physically interacts with an object or acts out a concept,
they are not just \"learning by doing\"; they are grounding an abstract
idea in multiple, correlated sensory streams---vision, proprioception
(body position), touch, and sound. Each stream provides a slightly
different \"view\" of the concept. For a low-SNR system, this redundancy
is computationally invaluable. By integrating these multiple, correlated
streams, the brain can effectively average out the noise in any single
channel, dramatically increasing the effective SNR of the concept being
learned. The need to \"see it\" or \"do it\" is therefore a need to
recruit additional processing channels to stabilize a noisy signal.

The neurobiological substrate for these strategies may be related to the
phenomenon of **hyper-connectivity**. Synesthesia, a condition where
sensory or cognitive pathways are cross-activated (e.g., seeing colors
for letters), is associated with increased structural and functional
connectivity in the brain.^63^ This hyper-connectivity is not just
between adjacent sensory areas but can be a global property of the brain
network.^67^ Intriguingly, individuals with grapheme-color synesthesia
report a cognitive style that is high in both verbal (serial) and vivid
imagery (parallel) dimensions, suggesting a unique capacity to integrate
these different processing modes.^68^ The hyper-connectivity that
underpins HFCP\'s reliance on parallel and multi-sensory processing may,
in some cases, become strong enough to manifest as conscious synesthetic
experiences.

This reframes cognitive style from a mere preference to a computational
necessity, leading to the fifth hypothesis:

> **Hypothesis 5:** *The high-bandwidth, low-SNR nature of HFCP makes
> purely abstract, serial processing an inefficient and fragile primary
> strategy. To achieve robust cognition, the HFCP architecture develops
> a strong and necessary reliance on parallel, embodied, and
> multi-sensory processing strategies. Parallel/visual thinking is used
> to detect global patterns in noisy data, while embodied/kinesthetic
> thinking grounds abstract concepts in redundant, multi-sensory input
> to increase their effective SNR.*

### **Section 6: The Predictive Challenge: A Reactive Stance in a Probabilistic World**

The final component of the HFCP cognitive architecture concerns its
relationship with time and uncertainty. The dominant contemporary view
in neuroscience is that the brain is fundamentally a **prediction
machine**. It constantly generates models of the world to predict future
sensory input, and then updates these models based on \"prediction
error\"---the mismatch between what was predicted and what actually
occurred.

The **\"Autism as a disorder of prediction\" (PIA) hypothesis** by Sinha
and colleagues provides a powerful framework for understanding many
features of autism.^27^ The theory posits that an impaired ability to
extract statistical regularities from past events compromises the
ability to predict future ones. This renders the world subjectively
\"magical,\" chaotic, and unpredictable, leading to chronic anxiety.^70^
The hallmark autistic traits of insistence on sameness and repetitive
behaviors are then understood as adaptive coping mechanisms to impose
predictability on an otherwise overwhelming environment.^27^

The HFCP framework incorporates and reframes the PIA hypothesis. The
issue is not a fundamental *inability* to predict, but a profound
*computational dilemma*. Building a robust predictive model requires
learning from past data. For an HFCP brain, the input data from which it
must learn is excessively detailed and noisy (low SNR). Extracting
stable statistical regularities from this kind of data is
computationally exorbitant. Furthermore, any predictive model that is
built is inherently fragile, as it is constantly being challenged by a
flood of new, high-fidelity input that may contain apparent
counter-evidence.

Faced with this dilemma, the HFCP system adopts a more conservative and
computationally viable strategy: it shifts from a proactive,
**predictive stance** to a more cautious, **reactive stance**. It
withholds commitment to a belief or an action until the evidence is
overwhelming---that is, until a clear, high-SNR signal finally emerges
from the noise. This explains the often-observed processing delay or
\"latency\" in individuals with these traits. This is not a deficit in
processing speed itself, but a strategic delay to ensure accuracy and
avoid making errors based on noisy data.

This reactive stance has profound implications for social interaction.
Socializing is a fast, dynamic, probabilistic process that relies on
rapid, \"good enough\" predictions about others\' intentions, emotions,
and likely responses.^71^ A reactive system that waits for certainty
will always be a step behind in a real-time social exchange. The classic
\"theory of mind\" difficulty is re-contextualized not as a lack of
empathy or social understanding, but as a computational bottleneck. The
system is overwhelmed by the high-bandwidth stream of social data
(micro-expressions, vocal prosody, body language) and cannot form a
stable predictive model of the other\'s mental state quickly enough to
keep pace with the interaction. This explains why the same individual
may demonstrate sophisticated social analysis offline (e.g., when
analyzing a film or novel) but struggle immensely with the cognitive
load of a live conversation.

This leads to the sixth hypothesis:

> **Hypothesis 6:** *The low-SNR data stream makes building and
> maintaining stable predictive models computationally expensive and
> unreliable. Consequently, the HFCP architecture defaults to a reactive
> cognitive stance, requiring a higher threshold of evidence before
> committing to a belief or action. This reactive stance manifests as a
> strategic processing delay and creates significant challenges in
> fast-paced, probabilistic domains like real-time social interaction.*

## **Part III: Lived Experience, Reframing, and Future Directions**

This final part of the report bridges the gap between the abstract
neurobiological and cognitive models of HFCP and the concrete, lived
experience of individuals who embody this processing style. It explains
how the core mechanisms of HFCP lead to a world that is often perceived
as aversive, necessitating the creation of \"sanctuaries.\" Finally, it
applies a strengths-based lens to the entire theory, reframing perceived
deficits as trade-offs, and outlines the implications for future
research and support.

### **Section 7: The Aversive World and the Search for High-SNR Sanctuaries**

A core aspect of the lived experience for an individual with an HFCP
architecture is the frequent feeling of being overwhelmed, stressed, and
anxious. The theory posits that this is not a psychological failing but
a predictable outcome of the interaction between the HFCP brain and a
world not designed for it. This experience is powerfully shaped and
entrenched by the mechanisms of **aversion learning**.

Aversion learning is one of the most potent forms of learning known to
neuroscience.^29^ The classic example is Conditioned Taste Aversion
(CTA), where an animal that eats a novel food (Conditioned Stimulus, CS)
and subsequently experiences malaise (Unconditioned Stimulus, US) will
form a powerful, long-lasting aversion to that food\'s taste and smell,
often after a single pairing.^19^ This process is critical for survival,
preventing repeated poisoning.^74^ The neural mechanisms are robust,
involving the amygdala in associating the CS with the aversive US, and
the insular cortex in flagging the novelty of the stimulus, which
strengthens the learning.^19^ The result is a hedonic shift: a
previously neutral or pleasant stimulus becomes powerfully aversive.^76^

The HFCP architecture is uniquely vulnerable to a generalized form of
this aversive conditioning that extends far beyond taste. The theory
proposes a \"perfect storm\" for the formation of powerful aversive
memories:

1.  **High-Intensity Input:** The world is experienced as \"painfully
    intense\" ^12^, providing a potent aversive US from sensory or
    social overload.

2.  **Hyper-Plastic Substrate:** The brain is primed to form strong,
    lasting memories from experience (Hypothesis 2).

3.  **Anxiety-Prone Stance:** The reactive, non-predictive stance
    fosters a state of chronic anxiety, which lowers the threshold for
    an experience to be perceived as aversive.^27^

When these three factors combine, an environment like a loud classroom,
a crowded shopping mall, or an unpredictable social gathering can become
a CS, paired with the overwhelming internal state of malaise (the US).
Through the powerful mechanism of aversion learning, the individual\'s
brain rapidly and durably encodes that environment as threatening.

In this context, the characteristic behaviors of withdrawal, insistence
on routine, ritualistic actions, and the development of deep, narrow
interests are not deficits. They are highly adaptive, intelligent
strategies for survival in a subjectively hostile world. They represent
a systematic effort to construct what can be termed **\"high-SNR
sanctuaries.\"** These are environments---physical, cognitive, or
social---that are deliberately simplified and controlled to maximize
predictability and minimize cognitive load. Within these sanctuaries,
the signal is clean, the rules are clear, the noise is filtered, and the
world feels coherent and safe. A routine, for example, eliminates the
cognitive load of decision-making and the anxiety of unpredictability. A
deep, narrow interest allows the individual to engage with a complex
system on their own terms, in a predictable way, turning the
high-bandwidth processing from a liability into a powerful asset. It is
within these high-SNR sanctuaries that the deep learning capacity of the
hyper-plastic brain can be fully and safely engaged, leading to the
development of profound expertise and the \"islands of proficiency\" or
\"savant\" skills sometimes observed.^27^ This explains the \"spiky
profile\" of abilities---extraordinary performance in high-SNR domains,
and significant struggle in low-SNR, unpredictable ones.^8^

This leads to the final hypothesis of the theory:

> **Hypothesis 7:** *The combination of high-intensity input,
> hyper-plasticity, and a reactive cognitive stance makes the HFCP
> architecture highly susceptible to generalized aversive conditioning
> from overwhelming sensory and social experiences. Consequently,
> behaviors such as withdrawal, insistence on sameness, and the
> cultivation of deep, narrow interests are adaptive strategies aimed at
> creating \"high-SNR sanctuaries\"---predictable, low-load environments
> that mitigate aversion and allow the system\'s strengths in deep
> learning to be deployed effectively.*

### **Section 8: A Strengths-Based Perspective on High-Fidelity Cognition**

The HFCP framework, by describing a cognitive architecture rather than a
disorder, naturally aligns with a **strengths-based model of
neurodiversity**.^1^ This model challenges the deficit-based medical
paradigm by arguing that every neurocognitive variation comes with a
unique profile of strengths and challenges.^8^ The goal is not to
\"normalize\" the individual but to create environments and provide
support that leverages their strengths and accommodates their
challenges.^2^

The theory of HFCP provides a mechanistic language for this reframing.
Every feature described in this report is a trade-off. High-bandwidth
perception is the foundation for both sensory overload and exceptional
detail recognition. Hyper-plasticity is the engine of both debilitating
rigidity and profound expertise. A reactive stance leads to both
social-processing delays and a high standard for logical consistency.
The following table systematically translates the common deficit-based
labels associated with this cognitive style into the mechanistic and
strengths-based language of HFCP.

**Table 2: A Strengths-Based Reframing of HFCP Characteristics**

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Deficit-Based Label     Underlying HFCP         Strengths-Based
                          Mechanism               Reframing & Associated
                                                  Abilities
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
  **Sensory               High-bandwidth, low-SNR **High-Fidelity
  Hypersensitivity /      data stream; reduced    Perception:** Ability
  Overload**              habituation due to      to perceive subtle
                          reactive stance. ^12^   details, patterns, and
                                                  nuances missed by
                                                  others. Foundational
                                                  for aesthetic
                                                  sensitivity, quality
                                                  control, and data
                                                  analysis.

  **Inflexible / Rigid /  Deep, stable learning   **Capacity for Deep,
  Insistence on           from a hyper-plastic    Robust Expertise:**
  Sameness**              substrate; creation of  Ability to develop
                          high-SNR sanctuaries to highly stable knowledge
                          manage aversive         structures and maintain
                          overload. ^12^          long-term focus. Leads
                                                  to reliability,
                                                  persistence, and
                                                  mastery.

  **Obsessive /           Creation of a high-SNR  **Ability to Achieve
  Restricted Interests**  sanctuary for deep      \"Flow States\" & Deep
                          engagement; leveraging  Knowledge:** Capacity
                          parallel processing and for intense, sustained
                          hyper-plasticity in a   concentration leading
                          controlled domain. ^30^ to encyclopedic
                                                  knowledge and
                                                  savant-like skills in
                                                  areas of interest.

  **Socially Awkward /    Reactive stance due to  **Preference for
  Theory of Mind          high cognitive load in  Precision & Honesty:**
  Deficit**               fast-paced,             A communication style
                          probabilistic social    that prioritizes
                          environments; low SNR   logical consistency and
                          of social cues. ^27^    factual accuracy over
                                                  ambiguous social
                                                  niceties. Leads to
                                                  loyalty and
                                                  trustworthiness.

  **Poor at Multitasking  High vulnerability to   **Monotasking
  / Slow Processing       extraneous cognitive    Proficiency:** Ability
  Speed**                 load; strategic delay   to engage in deep,
                          of reactive stance to   focused concentration
                          ensure accuracy in a    on a single task,
                          low-SNR environment.    leading to
                          ^7^                     high-quality, thorough
                                                  work. Resistance to
                                                  distraction when
                                                  engaged.

  **Learning Disability   High metabolic cost and **Strong
  (e.g., Dyslexia)**      cognitive load when     Parallel/Embodied
                          forced to use a         Thinking:** Superior
                          non-preferred,          ability in
                          inefficient serial      visual-spatial
                          processing channel      reasoning, holistic
                          (e.g., phonology). ^20^ pattern recognition,
                                                  and hands-on
                                                  problem-solving. A
                                                  different, not
                                                  deficient, learning
                                                  style.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

### **Conclusion: A New Framework for Research and Support**

The Theory of High-Fidelity Cortical Processing offers a novel,
mechanistic framework for understanding a specific mode of intense
cognitive experience. It proposes a coherent causal chain that begins
with a neurobiological substrate of hyper-reactivity and
hyper-plasticity, leads to a cognitive architecture defined by
high-bandwidth/low-SNR processing, and results in a cascade of adaptive
strategies and experiential consequences. This model unifies disparate
findings from the study of autism, dyslexia, sensory processing
sensitivity, and introversion, suggesting they may be different
manifestations of a common, underlying dimensional trait. By moving
beyond deficit-based labels, HFCP provides a new language for describing
these experiences in terms of computational trade-offs and adaptive
strategies.

The implications of this theory for support systems are significant. If
the core challenges of HFCP stem from cognitive overload and aversive
conditioning in low-SNR environments, then effective support should not
focus on \"fixing\" the individual\'s \"deficits.\" Instead, it should
focus on two primary goals: **managing cognitive load** and
**co-creating high-SNR environments**.

-   **For Education:** This means moving beyond simple accommodations to
    a fundamental redesign of instruction. It involves leveraging the
    natural strengths of HFCP by using visual, parallel, and embodied
    learning strategies (e.g., hands-on projects, visual mapping,
    simulations).^10^ It also requires a systematic effort to reduce
    extraneous cognitive load by providing clear, unambiguous
    instructions, minimizing environmental distractions, and breaking
    down complex information into manageable chunks.^43^

-   **For the Workplace:** This involves recognizing that individuals
    with HFCP can be exceptionally valuable assets when placed in the
    right roles. It means designing positions that capitalize on the
    strengths of deep focus, pattern recognition, and high-fidelity
    analysis, while minimizing the demands of unpredictable, fast-paced
    social interaction and constant multitasking.

-   **For Therapy and Personal Development:** The framework suggests a
    shift away from purely behavioral modification toward
    psychoeducation. Support should empower individuals to understand
    their own processing architecture. The goal becomes helping them
    develop personalized strategies for managing their cognitive load,
    identifying their triggers for aversive overload, and consciously
    designing their own high-SNR sanctuaries where they can not only
    feel safe but also thrive and fully realize their potential for deep
    expertise.

Finally, the HFCP theory generates several concrete, testable hypotheses
for future research:

1.  **Metabolic Correlates:** Do individuals scoring high on measures of
    SPS and introversion exhibit significantly higher brain lactate
    responses (measured via MRS) to complex cognitive tasks compared to
    controls, mirroring the findings in dyslexia?

2.  **Computational Modeling:** Can artificial neural networks designed
    with a high-bandwidth, low-SNR input channel and a hyper-plastic
    learning rule (e.g., high learning rate) be shown to spontaneously
    develop \"autistic-like\" behavioral strategies, such as a
    preference for highly predictable data streams and avoidance of
    noisy ones?

3.  **Intervention Efficacy:** Does training in embodied cognition and
    multi-sensory integration techniques disproportionately benefit
    learners with HFCP traits by providing them with more effective
    tools for increasing the effective SNR of information, thereby
    reducing their cognitive load?

By pursuing these and other related questions, the scientific community
can move toward a more nuanced, mechanistic, and ultimately more humane
understanding of the profound diversity of the human mind.

#### Works cited

1.  A Strengths-Based Approach to Neurodiversity \| Psychology Today,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/divergent-minds/202301/a-strengths-based-approach-to-neurodiversity]{.underline}](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/divergent-minds/202301/a-strengths-based-approach-to-neurodiversity)

2.  Embracing Neurodiversity: Empowering Individuals Beyond the Deficit
    Model, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.brehm.org/blog/embracing-neurodiversity-empowering-individuals-beyond-the-deficit-model]{.underline}](https://www.brehm.org/blog/embracing-neurodiversity-empowering-individuals-beyond-the-deficit-model)

3.  Dyslexia and the Brain: What Does Current Research Tell Us? \|
    Reading Rockets, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/dyslexia/articles/dyslexia-and-brain-what-does-current-research-tell-us]{.underline}](https://www.readingrockets.org/topics/dyslexia/articles/dyslexia-and-brain-what-does-current-research-tell-us)

4.  Strength-Based Versus Deficit-Based Thinking - Starr Commonwealth,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://starr.org/2016/strength-based-versus-deficit-based-thinking/]{.underline}](https://starr.org/2016/strength-based-versus-deficit-based-thinking/)

5.  The Neurobiology of Reading and Dyslexia, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.dys-add.com/resources/RecentResearch/Shaywitz2007.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.dys-add.com/resources/RecentResearch/Shaywitz2007.pdf)

6.  Autism as a disorder of prediction - PubMed, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25288765/]{.underline}](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25288765/)

7.  Neurodiversity Positively Predicts Perceived Extraneous Load in
    \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7102/14/5/516]{.underline}](https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7102/14/5/516)

8.  Strengths-Based Models and Neurodiversity \| Request PDF -
    ResearchGate, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380844786_Strengths-Based_Models_and_Neurodiversity]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380844786_Strengths-Based_Models_and_Neurodiversity)

9.  Cognitive load and neurodiversity in online education: a preliminary
    framework for educational research and policy - Frontiers, accessed
    June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/education/articles/10.3389/feduc.2024.1437673/pdf]{.underline}](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/education/articles/10.3389/feduc.2024.1437673/pdf)

10. Neurodiversity: A strengths-based approach to \... - The Education
    Hub, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://theeducationhub.org.nz/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Neurodiversity-A-strengths-based-approach-to-teaching-diverse-learners.pdf]{.underline}](https://theeducationhub.org.nz/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Neurodiversity-A-strengths-based-approach-to-teaching-diverse-learners.pdf)

11. Henry and Kamila Markram and the Intense World Theory: A Perspective
    on Stress and Neurodivergence, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://evostress.blog/stress-researchers/399-2/]{.underline}](https://evostress.blog/stress-researchers/399-2/)

12. The Intense World Theory -- A Unifying Theory of the Neurobiology
    \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3010743/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3010743/)

13. pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4086365/#:\~:text=Theory%20and%20research%20suggest%20that,environment%20and%20to%20social%20stimuli.]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4086365/#:~:text=Theory%20and%20research%20suggest%20that,environment%20and%20to%20social%20stimuli.)

14. Sensory processing sensitivity is associated with neural synchrony
    and functional connectivity during threatening movies \| bioRxiv,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.03.27.586963v1.full-text]{.underline}](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.03.27.586963v1.full-text)

15. The Introvert Extrovert Debate - County Line, accessed June 16,
    2025,
    [[https://crhscountyline.com/features/2014/02/17/the-introvert-extrovert-debate/]{.underline}](https://crhscountyline.com/features/2014/02/17/the-introvert-extrovert-debate/)

16. (PDF) Differences in regional brain volume related to the \...,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/51729065_Differences_in_regional_brain_volume_related_to_the_extraversion-introversion_dimension-A_voxel_based_morphometry_study]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/51729065_Differences_in_regional_brain_volume_related_to_the_extraversion-introversion_dimension-A_voxel_based_morphometry_study)

17. Neuroplasticity and Autism Therapy \| Early Intervention Training,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://autismcenterforkids.com/Neuroplasticity-and-autism-therapy/]{.underline}](https://autismcenterforkids.com/Neuroplasticity-and-autism-therapy/)

18. Neuroplasticity-based novel brain stimulation support \... -
    Frontiers, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/human-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2025.1522718/full]{.underline}](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/human-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2025.1522718/full)

19. Brain Mechanisms of Flavor Learning - PMC, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3166791/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3166791/)

20. (PDF) Dyslexic children have abnormal brain lactate response to
    reading- related language tasks - ResearchGate, accessed June 16,
    2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/12788701_Dyslexic_children_have_abnormal_brain_lactate_response_to_reading-\_related_language_tasks]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/12788701_Dyslexic_children_have_abnormal_brain_lactate_response_to_reading-_related_language_tasks)

21. Signal-to-noise ratio in neuroscience - Scholarpedia, accessed June
    16, 2025,
    [[http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Signal-to-noise_ratio_in_neuroscience]{.underline}](http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Signal-to-noise_ratio_in_neuroscience)

22. Measuring the signal-to-noise ratio of a neuron \| PNAS, accessed
    June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1505545112]{.underline}](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1505545112)

23. (PDF) Verbal or Visual Thinker? Different Ways of Orienting in a
    \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/244250898_Verbal_or_Visual_Thinker_Different_Ways_of_Orienting_in_a_Complex_Picture]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/244250898_Verbal_or_Visual_Thinker_Different_Ways_of_Orienting_in_a_Complex_Picture)

24. Visual thinking - Wikipedia, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_thinking]{.underline}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_thinking)

25. Kinaesthetic Learning \| What is Kinesthetic Learning, accessed June
    16, 2025,
    [[https://www.structural-learning.com/post/kinaesthetic-learning]{.underline}](https://www.structural-learning.com/post/kinaesthetic-learning)

26. Embodied cognition - Wikipedia, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embodied_cognition]{.underline}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embodied_cognition)

27. Autism as a disorder of prediction - PNAS, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1416797111]{.underline}](https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1416797111)

28. (PDF) Autism as a disorder of prediction - ResearchGate, accessed
    June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267752988_Autism_as_a_disorder_of_prediction]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267752988_Autism_as_a_disorder_of_prediction)

29. Reward and aversion systems of the brain as a functional unit. Basic
    mechanisms and functions - SciELO México, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.scielo.org.mx/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0185-33252015000400299]{.underline}](https://www.scielo.org.mx/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0185-33252015000400299)

30. The Intense World Theory of Autism Explained - Autistic &
    Unapologetic, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://autisticandunapologetic.com/2020/10/17/the-intense-world-theory-of-autism-explained/]{.underline}](https://autisticandunapologetic.com/2020/10/17/the-intense-world-theory-of-autism-explained/)

31. Intense world theory raises intense worries \| The Transmitter \...,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.thetransmitter.org/spectrum/intense-world-theory-raises-intense-worries/]{.underline}](https://www.thetransmitter.org/spectrum/intense-world-theory-raises-intense-worries/)

32. The highly sensitive brain: an fMRI study of sensory processing
    \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4086365/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4086365/)

33. Extraversion and introversion - Wikipedia, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extraversion_and_introversion]{.underline}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extraversion_and_introversion)

34. Differences in regional brain volume related to the
    extraversion-introversion dimension\--a voxel based morphometry
    study - PubMed, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22008612/]{.underline}](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22008612/)

35. Relationship between Personality and Gray Matter Volume in Healthy
    Young Adults: A Voxel-Based Morphometric Study, accessed June 16,
    2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3925163/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3925163/)

36. Relationship between Personality and Gray Matter Volume in Healthy
    Young Adults: A Voxel-Based Morphometric Study \| PLOS One, accessed
    June 16, 2025,
    [[https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0088763]{.underline}](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0088763)

37. Brain gray matter correlates of extraversion: A systematic review
    and \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6865809/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6865809/)

38. 3 Benefits Of Neuroplasticity For Children With Autism - Re-origin,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.re-origin.com/articles/neuroplasticity-children-with-autism]{.underline}](https://www.re-origin.com/articles/neuroplasticity-children-with-autism)

39. Hyper-excitability and hyper-plasticity disrupt cerebellar signal
    \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/300228.full]{.underline}](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/300228.full)

40. Hyperplasticity in Autism Spectrum Disorder confers protection from
    Alzheimer\'s disease, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25047996/]{.underline}](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25047996/)

41. Restricted and repetitive behavior in children with autism during
    the first three years of life: A systematic review - Frontiers,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.986876/full]{.underline}](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.986876/full)

42. Cntnap2 loss drives striatal neuron hyperexcitability and behavioral
    inflexibility - eLife, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://elifesciences.org/reviewed-preprints/100162v1]{.underline}](https://elifesciences.org/reviewed-preprints/100162v1)

43. Supporting Neurodivergent Learners through Cognitive Processing
    Awareness, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.mindbrained.org/2024/10/supporting-neurodivergent-learners-through-cognitive-processing-awareness/]{.underline}](https://www.mindbrained.org/2024/10/supporting-neurodivergent-learners-through-cognitive-processing-awareness/)

44. Neurodiversity and Cognitive Load - TeacherToolkit, accessed June
    16, 2025,
    [[https://www.teachertoolkit.co.uk/2024/10/17/neurodiversity-and-cognitive-load/]{.underline}](https://www.teachertoolkit.co.uk/2024/10/17/neurodiversity-and-cognitive-load/)

45. Neurobiology of Dyslexia - PMC, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4293303/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4293303/)

46. Reading the dyslexic brain: multiple dysfunctional routes revealed
    by a new meta-analysis of PET and fMRI activation studies -
    Frontiers, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/human-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00830/full]{.underline}](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/human-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00830/full)

47. Dyslexia and the Brain - Commonwealth Learning Center, accessed June
    16, 2025,
    [[https://www.commlearn.com/dyslexia-and-the-brain/]{.underline}](https://www.commlearn.com/dyslexia-and-the-brain/)

48. Brain scans reveal disruption in the neural circuitry of children
    with dyslexia - Yale School of Medicine, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://medicine.yale.edu/news/yale-medicine-magazine/article/brain-scans-reveal-disruption-in-the-neural-circuitry/]{.underline}](https://medicine.yale.edu/news/yale-medicine-magazine/article/brain-scans-reveal-disruption-in-the-neural-circuitry/)

49. The Neurobiological Bases of Reading Disability (Chapter 3) - The
    Dyslexia Debate Revisited - Cambridge University Press, accessed
    June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/dyslexia-debate-revisited/neurobiological-bases-of-reading-disability/9C07E38F9C0A83BB2B95413D93C4ABEA]{.underline}](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/dyslexia-debate-revisited/neurobiological-bases-of-reading-disability/9C07E38F9C0A83BB2B95413D93C4ABEA)

50. Imaging Brain Function with Positron Emission Tomography \| Request
    PDF - ResearchGate, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/279720592_Imaging_Brain_Function_with_Positron_Emission_Tomography]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/279720592_Imaging_Brain_Function_with_Positron_Emission_Tomography)

51. Dyslexic Children Have Abnormal Brain Lactate Response to
    Reading-Related Language Tasks - University of Washington, accessed
    June 16, 2025,
    [[http://faculty.washington.edu/toddr/dyslexic1.htm]{.underline}](http://faculty.washington.edu/toddr/dyslexic1.htm)

52. Dyslexic Children Have Abnormal Brain Lactate Response to
    Reading-Related Language Tasks - PMC, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7657735/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7657735/)

53. SNR in BCIs: A Deep Dive - Number Analytics, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.numberanalytics.com/blog/snr-in-bcis-deep-dive]{.underline}](https://www.numberanalytics.com/blog/snr-in-bcis-deep-dive)

54. Distinguishing between parallel and serial processing in visual
    \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7029944/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7029944/)

55. 10.5K: Serial and Parallel Processing - Medicine LibreTexts,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://med.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Anatomy_and_Physiology/Anatomy_and_Physiology\_(Boundless)/10%3A_Overview_of_the_Nervous_System/10.5%3A_Neurophysiology/10.5K%3A_Serial_and_Parallel_Processing]{.underline}](https://med.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Anatomy_and_Physiology/Anatomy_and_Physiology_(Boundless)/10%3A_Overview_of_the_Nervous_System/10.5%3A_Neurophysiology/10.5K%3A_Serial_and_Parallel_Processing)

56. Parallel processing (psychology) - Wikipedia, accessed June 16,
    2025,
    [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_processing\_(psychology)]{.underline}](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_processing_(psychology))

57. Parallel Processing Strategies of the Primate Visual System - PMC -
    PubMed Central, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2771435/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2771435/)

58. Distinguishing between parallel and serial processing in visual
    attention from neurobiological data \| bioRxiv, accessed June 16,
    2025,
    [[https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/383596v1]{.underline}](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/383596v1)

59. Distinguishing between parallel and serial processing in visual
    attention from neurobiological data - PubMed, accessed June 16,
    2025,
    [[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32218974/]{.underline}](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32218974/)

60. Embodied Cognition (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy), accessed
    June 16, 2025,
    [[https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/embodied-cognition/]{.underline}](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/embodied-cognition/)

61. Tactile-Kinesthetic Learning -- Scholar Within, accessed June 16,
    2025,
    [[https://scholarwithin.com/tactile-kinesthetic-learning]{.underline}](https://scholarwithin.com/tactile-kinesthetic-learning)

62. Learning Styles: Kinaesthetic Learner Characteristics - Engage
    Education, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://engage-education.com/blog/learning-styles-kinaesthetic-learner-characteristics/]{.underline}](https://engage-education.com/blog/learning-styles-kinaesthetic-learner-characteristics/)

63. Synesthesia: a window into cross-sensory perception, neurologic
    connectivity, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.medlink.com/news/synesthesia-a-window-into-cross-sensory-perception-neurologic-connectivity-and-creative-genius]{.underline}](https://www.medlink.com/news/synesthesia-a-window-into-cross-sensory-perception-neurologic-connectivity-and-creative-genius)

64. Synesthesia: Closer Brain Connections - Spirit Vine Retreat,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://spiritvineretreats.com/resources/newsletter/may-2015/inside-synesthesia-closer-connections-between-brain-regions-may-cause-senses-to-blend/]{.underline}](https://spiritvineretreats.com/resources/newsletter/may-2015/inside-synesthesia-closer-connections-between-brain-regions-may-cause-senses-to-blend/)

65. Investigation of the relationship between neuroplasticity and
    grapheme-color synesthesia - PMC - PubMed Central, accessed June 16,
    2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11366591/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11366591/)

66. (PDF) Top-down signal transmission and global hyperconnectivity in
    \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320420723_Top-down_signal_transmission_and_global_hyperconnectivity_in_auditory-visual_synesthesia_Evidence_from_a_functional_EEG_resting-state_study]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320420723_Top-down_signal_transmission_and_global_hyperconnectivity_in_auditory-visual_synesthesia_Evidence_from_a_functional_EEG_resting-state_study)

67. Top--down signal transmission and global hyperconnectivity in
    auditory‐visual synesthesia: Evidence from a functional EEG
    resting‐state study, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6866463/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6866463/)

68. (PDF) Synesthesia - ResearchGate, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/350984989_Synesthesia]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/350984989_Synesthesia)

69. Autism as a disorder of prediction - PNAS, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1416797111]{.underline}](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1416797111)

70. Autism as a disorder of prediction \| MIT News \| Massachusetts
    Institute of Technology, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://news.mit.edu/2014/autism-disorder-prediction-anxiety-1007]{.underline}](https://news.mit.edu/2014/autism-disorder-prediction-anxiety-1007)

71. Prediction Impairment May Explain Communication \... - Frontiers,
    accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.734024/full]{.underline}](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.734024/full)

72. Dopaminergic circuits underlying associative aversive learning -
    Frontiers, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/behavioral-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnbeh.2022.1041929/full]{.underline}](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/behavioral-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnbeh.2022.1041929/full)

73. Conditioned Taste Aversion Behavioral and Neural Processes -
    ResearchGate, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.researchgate.net/publication/375244404_Conditioned_Taste_Aversion_Behavioral_and_Neural_Processes]{.underline}](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/375244404_Conditioned_Taste_Aversion_Behavioral_and_Neural_Processes)

74. Conditioned Taste Aversion: Neural and Behavioral Processes -
    Amazon.com, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.amazon.com/Conditioned-Taste-Aversion-Behavioral-Processes/dp/019532658X]{.underline}](https://www.amazon.com/Conditioned-Taste-Aversion-Behavioral-Processes/dp/019532658X)

75. How Your Brain Learns Aversion After Food Poisoning - Technology
    Networks, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://www.technologynetworks.com/neuroscience/news/how-your-brain-learns-aversion-after-food-poisoning-398025]{.underline}](https://www.technologynetworks.com/neuroscience/news/how-your-brain-learns-aversion-after-food-poisoning-398025)

76. Brain Regions Responsible for the Expression of Conditioned Taste
    Aversion in Rats \| Chemical Senses \| Oxford Academic, accessed
    June 16, 2025,
    [[https://academic.oup.com/chemse/article/32/1/105/359879]{.underline}](https://academic.oup.com/chemse/article/32/1/105/359879)

77. Chapter 4. Strengths-Based Model of Neurodiversity and Autism -
    Psychiatry Online, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://psychiatryonline.org/doi/10.1176/appi.books.9781615379514.lg04]{.underline}](https://psychiatryonline.org/doi/10.1176/appi.books.9781615379514.lg04)

78. Neurodiversity-Driven Cognitive Development Framework: Integrating
    Strength-Based - OSF, accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://osf.io/6ys54_v1/download/?format=pdf]{.underline}](https://osf.io/6ys54_v1/download/?format=pdf)

79. More Evidence for Three Types of Cognitive Style: Validating the
    \..., accessed June 16, 2025,
    [[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5248590/]{.underline}](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5248590/)
